This month we'll discuss something that is treasured by all of God's people, no matter where we live and no matter what language we speak.
Our subject is the divine name of our Heavenly Father.
As you realize in the Hebrew that name is represented by four Hebrew letters, they can be transliterated into English as Y-H-W-H or J-H-V-H.
And this Hebrew name is commonly pronounced in English as J-H-V-H.
Acts chapter 15 verses 14 and 17 tells us that J-H-V-H has taken out from the nations a people for his name.
And we're proud to be the people who bear his name today as J-H-V's witnesses.
By contrast, most religions are claimed to follow the Bible no longer accept or honor that holy name.
In some cases they've purged it from their copies of the Bible and even banned its use in their church services.
But as serious students of God's Word, we're not surprised by this turn of events.
Notice please the words that are recorded in Jeremiah 23 and verse 27.
Here Jehovah speaks of those who are false prophets. Notice what he said that they would try to do.
They intend to make my people forget my name. Can someone really be made to forget his Father's name?
As impossible as that may seem, that's exactly what Satan has been trying to do. Make people forget Jehovah's name.
How vital it is that we continue to declare Jehovah's name to all, near and far.
But why do so many translators remove Jehovah's name from their translations of the Bible and replace it with such titles as Lord or God?
In this month's program, we're going to examine two of the common reasons that they give.
We'll also see why those reasons are not valid at all.
And in so doing, we will enhance our appreciation for the new world translation of the Holy Scriptures.
So what is one reason given for removing God's name from the Bible?
Some translators have said that they're following an ancient Jewish tradition.
An example of this is found in the preface of a translation that was released in 1935.
It said in part and I'll quote it.
In this translation, we have followed the Orthodox Jewish tradition and substituted the Lord for the name Yahweh.
And the phrase the Lord God for the phrase the Lord Yahweh.
It's true that at one point in history, the Jewish people stopped pronouncing God's name when they were reading aloud from the Hebrew Scriptures.
However, please note these important facts.
First of all, although because of superstition, the Jews stopped pronouncing God's name out loud,
they never removed it from the Scriptures.
In fact, even today, if you buy a Hebrew Bible in Israel, you can see the four letters forming the tetragramaton.
These letters are still found thousands of times in the Hebrew text of the Bible.
Another point, the Jewish people even used the tetragramaton in their rabbinical writings such as the Mishnah.
And yet another point, interestingly, scholars who translated the Christian Greek Scriptures into Hebrew in the 16th century CE,
naturally included the divine name when rendering quotations from the Hebrew Scriptures because it's found in all standard Hebrew texts.
So it wasn't the Jewish people who removed God's name from the Hebrew Scriptures.
Rather, it was apostate Christians who took the tradition one step further and actually removed the name of God from the translations of the Hebrew Scriptures.
Still, as mentioned earlier, the Jews did adopt the tradition of not pronouncing God's name.
Jesus warned the Jewish people of His day about clinging to their traditions.
He even said, as recorded in Matthew 15 verses 3 through 6, that they made the Word of God invalid by means of their traditions.
Of course, not all traditions are automatically wrong, are they?
But is the tradition of refusing to pronounce the divine name reasonable?
Is it applied consistently? No.
We can say so for three reasons.
The first reason, the practice may have developed due to an extremist interpretation of the third commandment as stated at Exodus 20 verse 7, which says,
you must not take up the name of Jehovah your God in a worthless way.
However, that very Bible verse uses God's name twice.
Many other verses, such as Psalm 148 verse 13, encourage us to praise the name of Jehovah.
The second reason, the Jews continued to pronounce the divine name as part of their personal names.
Name such as Joshua, Hezekiah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and many others contained part of Jehovah's name.
So every time the Jews used these names, they were in fact pronouncing part of Jehovah's name.
The third reason, Jehovah had his name recorded thousands of times in the Bible for our benefit and our use.
If he didn't want us to use his name, then why did he reveal it to mankind?
When Manoa asked Jehovah's angel as recorded in Judges 13, 17, and 18,
what is your name so that we may honor you when your word comes true?
Jehovah's angel said to him,
why are you asking about my name, seeing that it is a wonderful one?
The angel refused to reveal his name to Manoa.
Jehovah could have done the same, but he didn't.
He told us his name.
So rather than trying to follow a so-called ancient Jewish tradition, we follow the example of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Notice what he said in prayer to his father as recorded in John 17 and verse 26.
I have made your name known to them and will make it known so that the love with which you love me may be in them and I in union with them.
Another reason often given by translators for not using God's name in the text of their translations is that they don't know the exact pronunciation of the original name.
Some scholars feel that the original pronunciation was closer to Yahweh rather than Jehovah.
Others feel that it may have been Jehovah.
Just how important is the exact pronunciation of the original Hebrew name?
Could we get sidetracked by trying to determine what that pronunciation was?
Well, first of all, let's establish why we use the pronunciation Jehovah in English.
Is it because it's the closest pronunciation to the original?
No. We use the name Jehovah because it's widely recognized in English.
Is this a reasonable position to take?
Yes. That's why we do another languages.
Usually, we don't try to say Jehovah's name exactly the same way in every language.
For example, in some of the languages of the South Pacific where I served as a missionary, the divine name is pronounced as Jehovah or Jehovah.
Each pronunciation was established by local Bible translations and influenced by language characteristics.
These pronunciations became well-established and familiar to people.
So it would be unreasonable to try to make people pronounce the name exactly the same in every language.
You may not have thought of this, but even in English, some of us say the name slightly differently because of our different accents.
Some say Jehovah, others Jehovah, others Jehovah or Jehovah.
So what's the point?
The pronunciation changes according to the rules of language or even due to individual accent.
So it's not necessary to try and say the divine name exactly the same way as in Hebrew.
In English, the pronunciation Jehovah has a long history.
It goes back hundreds of years.
The first rendering of God's personal name in an English Bible appeared in 1530 in William Tindell's translation of the Pentateuch.
He used the form Jehovah.
Over time, the English language changed and the spelling of the divine name was modernized to become Jehovah.
It's true, though, that some scholars would prefer Yahweh instead of Jehovah.
One such scholar was Joseph Rotherham.
When he originally translated the Rotherham Amphasized Bible, a literal translation in 1902, he used God's name in his translation but preferred the form Yahweh.
However, just a few years later, in 1911, when he published his studies in the Psalms, he returned to the form Jehovah.
Why? Well, he still felt that Yahweh was a more accurate pronunciation, but he used the form Jehovah.
He said, because, and I quote, of the desirability of keeping in touch with the public here and I in a matter of this kind, in which the principal thing is the easy recognition of the divine name, end of quote.
In other words, the name Jehovah was more commonly used in English.
But shouldn't we try to be as close as possible with our pronunciation of the divine name?
As already mentioned, scholars do not agree on the exact pronunciation, but even if they did, that's not what is done with other names in the Bible.
For example, let's consider the name Jesus. That's the common pronunciation in English for the name of God's Son.
But imagine, please, if you were to go back in time to Jesus' day, if you were to stand in public and call out the name Jesus in English, would anyone know who you were referring to? That would be unlikely.
At that time, Jesus' name was probably pronounced even as either as Yeshua or Yehoshua as in Hebrew or Isus as in Greek.
And I'm sure you'll agree, both of those forms are quite different from our English pronunciation.
Consider to this fact, Jehovah didn't require that his Son's name be spelled and pronounced the Hebrew way when the Christian Greek scriptures were written.
He allowed the writers to use the common equivalent for Jesus' name in Greek, even though it sounded a lot different from how it was pronounced in Hebrew.
Likewise, today, Jesus' name is pronounced differently in Spanish, in Italian, and in German, and many other languages.
So should we stop using the name Jesus because it was not pronounced that way in Hebrew or because it was pronounced differently in other languages? Of course not.
It's also worth noting that in Hebrew, Jesus' name had either three or four syllables according to how it may have been pronounced, either Yehoshua or Yehoshua.
But in English, there are only two syllables in the name Jesus.
Obviously, the number of syllables is not the main factor to be concerned about.
In a similar way, we don't want to be sidetracked by arguing about the number of syllables in Jehovah's name in Hebrew, whether it should be three syllables as in Jehovah or just two as in Yahweh.
The main thing is that we use whatever pronunciation is common in our language.
The worst thing we could do is suppress the name of God by failing or refusing to use it.
How grateful we are to have the new world translation of the Holy Scriptures.
This translation is now available in part or in whole in 128 languages, and 39 more languages are in the process of being translated.
Not only is this a clear, accurate translation of God's Word, but more importantly, it honors the name of Almighty God over 7,000 times by translating it and not hiding it.
What a privilege we have to know and use the personal name of our loving Father Jehovah.